Kayla Barlow 
BDPA 
IT Showcase
28 May 2020 
Biography 
	My name is Kayla Denise Barlow, and I reside in Indianapolis, Indiana. I am a rising senior at Cathedral High School, at which I participate in a variety of activities such as Black Student Union, E.M.B.R.A.C.E. (Empowering More to Become Representatives Advocating for a Commitment to Equity),  Girl's Up (a women's empowerment club), and the Cathedral High School marching, pep, and concert bands (in which I play the flute). In regard to potential careers, although I am currently undecided, I am considering pursuing a writing related career such as journalism. 
















	













	IT Showcase Research Paper
 
	Technology has always been a mechanism by which mankind has been able to advance to protect mankind. During pandemics, in which individuals worldwide are subjected to virus outbreaks resulting in overwhelming amounts of casualties, technology is even more pertinent. Now, in the year 2020, the Covid-19 pandemic is underway. Over one million individuals have been infected so far, over one hundred thousand have lost their lives, and despite many government sanctioned efforts to reduce the numbers of cases, the curve seems to be on a never-ending journey upward. In order to bring about a swifter end to this coronavirus, governments (again worldwide) are justifiably choosing to rely on the use of technology (which as mentioned has been used to advance society for centuries). For many reasons, technology is vital to both ending this pandemic and preventing future pandemics by setting a precedent for how the response to pandemics (with impacts to this extent) should be executed. In this instance specifically, technology is needed for several reasons. Due to the transformative assistance information technology provides to the pandemic issue in terms of tracking the virus, producing respiratory aid equipment, and care for infected patients, information technology is vital in reducing the number of lives hindered and lost due to this current coronavirus pandemic.

	In regard to tracking the virus, which is possibly one of the most central objectives involving containment of the virus, this is entirely enabled due to information technology. Many mobile phone companies have begun monitoring common apps such as GPS, in addition to common devices structures such as cellphone masts, to track the spread of Covid-19. To this point, and the effectiveness that this use of technology promises, even Apple and Google (which are longstanding rival companies) have decided to correspond in order to develop a way to monitor Bluetooth signals to track the disease of the spread as well. By monitoring the mobile devices, companies are able to identify the location of infected individuals, track who these individuals interact with, and the whereabouts of this second party as well. Through these methods, the governments of countries across the globe are able to contain the virus, decide what states need stricter quarantine enforcement, and estimate statistics that accurately represent both infection and fatality rates of the virus. However, because this method is reliant upon personal mobile devices, the primary concern with this type of contact tracing is the immorality of infringing on the personal lives of mobile device users. 

	In order to remedy these concerns, these same companies have also developed innovative ways to keep personal information from being compromised. For instance, Kurt Rohloff, who co-founded Duality Technologies, is the preverbal front runner in this effort. At Duality,  Artificial Intelligence and analytics are being used on encrypted data in an attempt to identify those infected without gaining personal information, which therefore "allows healthcare providers to identify COVID-19 exposures without sharing sensitive information with location data providers or viewing information pertaining to unexposed individuals," which further evidences the effectiveness of the use of Artificial Intelligence and encrypted data (ITU News 1). Similarly, Thomas Weigand, who is a professor at the Fraunhofer Heinrich Hertz Institute and Chair of ITU’s AI for Health Focus Group, made an app in with the Pan-European Privacy Preserving Proximity Tracing (PEPP-PT)  that performs contact tracing by means of Bluetooth technology, machine learning, and artificial intelligence as well. To ensure privacy of application users, a passive scan (activated by Bluetooth) is used, that any acquires data is encrypted, and that the app can be uninstalled (and data subsequently erased) after the pandemic ends as well. Additional mechanisms are also in progress to further ensure that personal information is not used. Since privacy concerns have been met by such measures, contact tracing is an entirely beneficial method that can be used to effectively measure and track the spread of the COVID-19 virus. 
	Yet another means by which technology can be used to reduce the number of lives detrimentally effected by the virus is through the production of respiratory aid equipment. Since those infected by COVID-19 often suffer from (sometimes fatal) respiratory complications, ventilators are gravely mandatory to ensure the safety of infected patients. Ventilators allow the patient to breathe through mechanical assail even. Technology has proved vital in crafting machinery which manufactures ventilators. In addition,  technology has prompted and enable companies to manufacture new, innovate machines similar to ventilators as well. One such machine is the Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) machine. In Lombardy, Italy studies have shown that an impressively fifty percent of patients given oxygen through these Continuous Positive Airway Pressure machines have not required any form of invasive mechanical ventilation (due to the effectiveness of these machines). In response to this knowledge, more Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) machines have been produced in the United Kingdom. Mercedes Formula One has been a leading production force, as the company "has worked with University College London engineers and clinicians at University College London Hospital to build a CPAP that gives oxygen to the lungs without a ventilator, and this model uses 70 percent less oxygen than earlier models" (ITU News). To this point, machines that were used to produce parts for Mercedes' cars (pre-pandemic) are now being repurposed to produce Continuous Positive Airway Pressure machines, and the machine design are open source meaning other companies can reproduce e equipment if they deem it necessary. Consequently, countless other companies have followed suit, repurposing their open manufacturing plants for CPAP'S, while other companies have begun manufacturing ventilators and personal protective equipment to further fight the virus. This uses of technology provides ventilators and CPAP'S, which have the potential to save the lives of any COVID-19 patients. 

	While the production of CPAP'S, ventilators, and other helpful machinery or equipment prove to help tremendously, another facet of the COVID-19 pandemic that technology had potential to be of aid in is in regards to care for the infected patients. Due to the massive number of patients, many hospitals are experiencing extreme conditions in which it is difficult for medical staff to attend to all patients. To assist those working in hospitals (in these conditions), hospitals across the globe have deployed technology to help care for the patients. In China, remote controlled robots are being used to perform necessary procedures needed to test for COVID-19, such as mouth swabs, ultrasound tests, stethoscope readings, and organ readings. In Italy, robots are also being utilized, though primarily used to deliver food and nourishment to quarantined patients, and monitor health indicators of other infected patients. At a Swiss medical technology company named Ava, biometric bracelets are being constructed "to track potential cases of COVID-19 in real time to create an 'early warning system'" (ITU News). 

These bracelets will record information and data (including temperature, breathing rate, and heart rate) and send this information to a laboratory in Switzerland so that algorithms can be formulated to identify physiology patterns in COVID-19 patients that could allow cases to be identified even prior to noticeable symptoms. Researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) have a similar device named Emerald. Emerald was previously used to monitor patients with chronic diseases, but has now been repurposed to monitor the health of COVID-19 patients. Emerald uses wireless signals that bounce off the patients' body (and then return to the surety) to analyze algorithms that track the patients' breathing rates, movements, and sleep patterns. All information is then sent to doctors, allowing doctors to review the information form the comfort of their own residence. By utilizing technology to provide aid to COVID-19 patients, those who are suffering most from this virus, technology has advanced to provide mankind with even more assistance in fighting this pandemic. 

	Ultimately, technology has been used to both shorten the time of this pandemic, and reduce the number of lives both infected, and lost due to the virus. Whether through  contact tracing to track and contain the virus, production of machines such as life-saving CPAP'S and ventilators that aid the infected, or technology created for patient care (like Emerald or the bracelets at Ava) technology has already immensely assisted patients and non-patients alike who desire for the pandemic to come to a close. With technology, scientists are able to craft even more life-saving inventions and vaccines to improve the lives of all who have been negatively impacted by the virus. For these reasons, the use of technology is vital to the worldwide fight to resolve this pandemic. 




	Works Cited 
King, Charles. "How IT Vendors are Protecting Communities, Customers, Partners During Pandemic." Vocational and Career Collection. 3 March 2020. Medium. 

ITU News. "3 Key Areas Innovative Tech is Helping During the COVID-19 Pandemic." International News. 17 April 2020. Medium. 

ITU News. "COVID-19 How Mobile Phone Contact Tracing Can Save Lives – And Preserve Privacy." International News. 6 April 2020. Medium. 


















